What You Never Suspected About Water in the Atmosphere
Are you aware of the H2O molecules structural capabilities in the atmosphere?
Have you ever wondered about the molecular dynamics of what is really going on in the cone or vortex of a tornado?
On a molecular level water is very aggressive about getting together with other water molecules to become decidedly unaggressive. We mostly notice the result of the water molecule’s aggression, its complete lack of aggression, and we are, therefore, mostly unaware of how incredibly aggressive it, the H2O molecule, can be to become unaggressive. More specifically, the H2O molecule’s aggression is a result of its inherit polarity and the electromagnet implications thereof: as water, on the molecular level, aggressively seeks out connections with other water molecules, The strength and persistence of these forces cause it to collectively (in the form of liquid water) to become more interconnected molecularly, more entangled, denser. And that’s where things get strange. Because the more entangled and denser it (water) becomes (the more bonds are achieved between molecules of H2O) the more the forces that caused it to become entangled are neutralized, turned off, resulting in the high fluidity (low viscosity) of water. In a sense, H2O molecules are in a great big hurry to surround themselves with other H2O molecules (by way of hydrogen bond connections at all four locations of their structure) so that they can treat other H2O molecules with (almost) complete indifference.
The mechanism that underlies this strange passive-aggressive behavior of the water molecule—this individual tendency to aggressively seek to become collectively unaggressive—might best be understood with respect to the fact that the bond that takes place between water molecules is a hydrogen bond. Unlike covalent bonds, water’s hydrogen bond is the result of (a function of) the polarity of the two H2O molecules that are participants in the bond. However, and in complete contrast to a covalent bond, when a hydrogen bond is achieved a fraction of the polarity is neutralized, turned off, in both of the two H2O molecules that participate in the hydrogen bond. So, ironically, the achievement of a hydrogen bond (and each H2O molecule can participate in up to four bonds, each with a different H2O molecule) is at one and the same time the result of the water molecule’s polarity and the (partial) neutralization thereof.
This tendency to become entangled, to aggressively fold in on itself, and to, thereby, neutralize its polarity as it becomes entangled is so effective and so instantaneous (and happening on such a such a microscopic scale) that we are mostly unaware of the H2O molecule’s underlying ability to produce some fairly significant electromagnetic forces (surface tension) and bond strength (tensile strength). (Note: liquid water’s hydrogen bond offer’s no compressive strength whatsoever.) All in all, what it really comes down to is this: H2O molecules are so effective at getting together with other H2O molecules and neutralizing the polarity that brought them together, we (us humans) generally are unaware of the possibility that if a mechanism can be theorized (or experimentally revealed) that will defeat the H2O molecule’s aggressive and insidious tendency to collectively fold in on itself and, thereby, neutralize its polarity, then these structural capabilities can emerge (there are two: [a.] bond strength [tensile strength only] and [b.] surface tension).
In a sense H2O is like a superhero. It’s superpowers are concealed from us by its ability to blend in with a crowd of other depolarized, mild mannered H2O molecules. Its true strength is only revealed when events tear it away from the crowd. Only when alone, when individual water molecules are detached (or relatively detached [this is important]) from other water molecules do water’s superpowers emerge.
Have you every wondered why it is that tornadoes are associated with wind shear in which one of the bodies of air is moist and the other is dry? Well, wonder no more. That mystery is solved. Follow the link on this blog to my book entitled, Solving Tornadoes: Mastering the Mystery of the Vortex. For the first time you will find a scientific discussion of the molecular dynamics of what is really going on in the cone or vortex of a tornado.
________________


Tornado Solution Too Easy, Too Inexpensive, Too Effective
Initial Question
Everybody has seen it. Everybody knows exactly what I’m talking about. Yet there is nothing on it anywhere. It doesn’t matter where you look, internet, books, science journals, there is zero insight and/or discussion of the molecular dynamics of the very distinctive and highly observable cone or vortex of tornadoes.  You may have done the same thing I’ve done. After viewing video of a tornado you get on your computer and do a number of searches using combinations of the following words: tornado, vortex, molecular, dynamics, composition, expecting to find some kind of explanation. You might even have ended up at this site which does a fairly good job of encapsulating the attitude of meteorologists who, it seems, would have us believe that observation of tornadic vortices has more to do with our perception than it does physical reality:
“It is not a “thing” in the sense that a table or a book (neglecting atomic or molecular fluctuations) is the same from one moment to the next. Much confusion about tornadoes comes from thinking of tornadoes as objects rather than as the kinematic manifestation of dynamic processes.”
Obviously this is just doublespeak intended to minimize the issue. Nobody disputes that a vortex is more than just a listing of molecular composition and percentages thereof. Nobody disputes that energy is involved, such as that associated with its rotation and that associated with air moving up and through its conduit-like structure. And nobody disputes that situational factors are instrumental. It is, for example, commonly observed that factors associated with wind-shear between two bodies of air moving at cross angles—one being relatively moist and the other relatively dry—and other factors such as general instability and high winds aloft are also associated with the observation of these vortices. But none of this answers the question: what specifically is going on with the molecules that comprise the cone or vortex?
I had been entertaining this question in my mind casually for fifteen or twenty years. Every once in a while I would read something or see something on TV that would trigger my thinking. One of these triggers was the concept that water is a non-Newtonian fluid.   Newtonian fluids are fluids in which, “shear strain is directly proportional to shear stress.” Non-Newtonian fluids, therefore, are fluids in which shear strain is indirectly or even inversely proportional to shear stress. What this means is that whereas Newtonian fluids get weaker under stress non-Newtonian fluids get stronger under stress (in particular ways). After further investigation I came to the conclusion that water’s non-Newtonian attributes are an implication of the H2O molecule’s polarity and associated hydrogen bonding. In my book, entitled Solving Tornadoes: Mastering the Mystery of the Vortex, I provide details as to how these cumulative factors, starting with clusters/droplets of water suspended in the atmosphere, produce a plasma (or plasma-like substance), an heretofore unspecified phase of water, as being the answer to the question asked in the above paragraph. (If you are interested in a brief overview of the underlying physical principles and forces involved with this theorized plasma phase of water follow thislink.)
Greater Realization
As is explained in more detail in my book, the role of atmospheric water, in the form of this newly discovered plasma is much more centrally involved with the general circulation than anybody had previously imagined. And this is true despite the fact that the role previously imagined for water, as the source of the force of storms and upward movement by way of convection, is completely refuted by the realization (a realization that is arrived at through this new understanding) that, in contrast to what everybody has believed for a very long time, moist air is heavier and not lighter than dry air and therefore cannot provide any kind of up-welling force whatsoever.   Instead—made possible by the structural capabilities of this newly discovered plasma phase of water—the jet stream takes center stage as the source of energy for storms and general circulation, including both updrafts and downdrafts. The larger picture that emerges implicates the jet stream as being more structurally significant, more active, and more multi-faceted than we are generally aware; most of its activities taking place very high, all along the extensive boundary between the relatively moist troposphere and the very dry stratosphere.  Additionally, the jet stream is revealed as a thermodynamic entity that maximizes entropy, conserves energy, and does work (storms). At one and the same time the jet stream is a river with many tributaries most of which are invisible to us. Energy gets distributed, by way of vacuum effect, along these tributaries based on a relatively straightforward, working principle (which I will not describe here, because it will only cause confusion; suffice it to say that boundaries between dry air and moist air are essential) in which the structural capabilities of this plasma are pivotal in regards to their role in the manifestation of the conduits of this distribution. Storms and tornadoes, being at the far-reaching ends of these conduits of distribution and not the independent entities that some (including most meteorologists) have imagined them to be, can now be correctly considered from the perspective of the factors that underlie the growth of said structure in the lower part of the atmosphere, providing us insight that opens the door to methods of tornado mitigation that previously had not been considered. (More on mitigation below.)
In a paper entitled, A History of Prevailing Ideas about the General Circulation of the Atmosphere,   Edward N. Lorenz (1983) writes of these, “prevailing ideas,” occurring in steps, which is summed up in the final three paragraphs:
If our own most recent view of the general circulation (Lorenz, 1969) is accurate, we may be nearing the end of the fourth step. We have pictured a circulation that, if not easily explainable in simple sentences (except by calling it a baro-clinic-instability phenomenon), can at least be duplicated in its main features by numerical solutions of fairly realistic approximations to the governing dynamic equations. The statistics that have been evaluated from these solutions compare fairly well with those determined from real atmospheric data. There is a comfortable feeling that the problem is nearly solved.
We may therefore pause and ask ourselves whether this step will be completed in the manner of the last three. Will the next decade see new observational data that will disprove our present ideas? It would be difficult to show that this cannot happen.
Our current knowledge of the role of the various phases of water in the atmosphere is somewhat incomplete; eventually it must encompass both thermodynamic and radiational effects. We do not fully understand the interconnections between the tropics, which contain the bulk of water, and the remaining latitudes. Satellite observations have revealed various features, such as a frequent continuum of clouds extending northeastward from the tropical Pacific into the central United States, which were not previously recognized. Perhaps near the end of the 20th century we shall suddenly discover that we are beginning the fifth step.
I think it fairly certain that when Lorenz wrote of these, “various phases of water in the atmosphere,” back in 1983 the possibility of a plasma phase of water occurring naturally in our atmosphere was not even a remote consideration.  Moreover, the notion that such a phase of water could provide the structure, and thereby, the leverage necessary to enable the jet stream to be the dominant influence of atmospheric flow (and one that would simultaneously effectuate storms as the mechanism to replenish the water expended in the process) would have sounded perfectly audacious to his ears. It is now 2014, here I am and here it is. In consideration of the fact that this new understanding does a better job of explaining what is actually observed than does current thinking/theory my audacious sounding claims about the role of water in the atmosphere and implications thereof is, in my opinion, not audacious at all. Moreover, I am not hesitant to make the argument that truly audacious claims have been a part of meteorology’s mythology and catechism for longer than even its the most mature practitioners can remember:
* That moist air is lighter and convects up through dry air to power storms. This assumption has remained untested and completely unchallenged over the full breadths of Meteorology’s 170 year history. It’s empirical verification is about 169 years overdue.
* That a rising bubble of warm, moist air (or multiples thereof) can somehow explain (or be the trigger/cause of) widespread low pressure and the strong cold winds associated with storms. More specifically, these phenomena, (cold fronts) are just assumed in synoptic models and, therefore, have no logical connection to the notion that storms are caused and powered by convection of moist air (and/or warm air).
* That the same seemingly benign process of warm, moist air rising can somehow cause the extremely concentrated and high magnitude of energy found in tornadoes (especially the larger, more destructive tornadoes).
* Depending upon when it is argumentatively convenient to assume one or the other, that dry air serves as both the substrate through which “lighter” moist air convects and as the cap (inversion layer) that stops and/or opposes the up-welling force of convection. And that the latter of these two absurdities, the cap, explains both how storms and tornadoes can happen hundreds of miles away from the locations the moist air was created and, as if that is not crazy enough, how there can be a build up of upwelling energy that explains the high magnitude of energy in some storms and tornadoes. (More on this issue/theme can be found here.)
* That one can observe the cone or vortex of a tornado and not notice, or at least suspect, its structural functionality or the underlying molecular distinctions that, seemingly, crying out for explanation and, somehow, dismiss it as, “not a thing.”
And the one that is most arrogantly audacious of all:
* That researchers (meteorologists, especially those associated with tornadogenesis) can claim to know that tornadoes can never be prevented or mitigated and, therefore, the best we can ever expect is to better predict them.
There is a semi-informal rule of science that extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence.   As you can see in the above list, this is a rule that the discipline of meteorology has chosen to ignore. It would be nice to think that they would read this post, acknowledge the shortcomings indicated herein, take the bull by the horns, and begin to actually take the steps necessary to attempt to test these notions experimentally. But their attitude is that they have a consensus and, as such, they have nothing to prove to anybody.  Instead they expect that we should blindly accept what they profess.   Unfortunately this unprofessional attitude leaves us here at Solving Tornadoes with no choice but to take a hard stance. As far as we are concerned, unless and until they begin to change their attitude with respect to meeting the requirements for extraordinary evidence of their (above mentioned) extraordinary claims their input or advice will be looked at with the same scrutiny that one would invoke when presented with advice from members of a cult or religious belief. (The history of science has proven that taking a hard stance is the only viable option when dealing with science denialism, especially when such is ingrained in the long-standing traditions of a scientific discipline.)
Simple Solution
At this point in reading this blog post you may be not quite sure what all the fuss is about. If you take nothing else away from this reading experience take the following and please relay it to everybody you know: mitigating and/or preventing large, destructive tornadoes may well prove to be extremely easy, extremely inexpensive, and extremely effective! And the extraordinary evidence that we here at Solving Tornadoes intend to provide to substantiate this extraordinary claim is to begin to do just that: mitigate and/or prevent large destructive tornadoes!
To get a more in-depth understanding as to how we expect to do this I would direct you to my book, mentioned above. (Or, for a somewhat more vague and meandering exposition on this theme you can go to the website that I completed in June of 2013 (link). I suggest reading Parts One, Two and Three. But you could just skip ahead to Part Three to get a sense of what specific mitigation measures are being prescribed.) Or even, just read the following, which I hereby present as a series of talking points that you can commit to memory and relay to others:
1. Made possible by the structural capabilities of a newly discovered plasma phase of water, the jet stream is the source of energy for storms and tornadoes.
2. The energy of storms is distributed, by way of vacuum effect, through down-reaching tributaries which are themselves vortices (conduits) constructed from this plasma, tornadoes being the far-reaching end of these conduits of distribution.
3. Boundaries between dry air and moist air, what are referred to as “layers of differentness” (or, more simply, “differentness”) are the resource that these vortices of plasma grow into.
4. The higher the quality of this differentness with respect to being long, flat, straight, smooth and distinct the greater the potential for rapid growth and greater energy transfer and, consequently, the greater the potential for larger, higher energy vortices/tornadoes.
5. More commonly referred to (erroneously) as “inversion” layers, the long (extensive) straight, high quality boundary layers that form naturally in the lower atmosphere during calm weather conditions are, essentially, the accidents waiting to happen in tornado alley (and other parts of the world that experience large, destructive tornadoes). Fortunately however, these sleeping giants of differentness are themselves rather delicate and easily destroyed. Relatively slight perturbations can/will greatly reduce/eliminate their qualitatively determined ability to facilitate the rapid growth and energy transfer associated with large, destructive tornadoes. Specifically, the threat of large, destructive tornadoes associated with inversion layers can be greatly reduced by any perturbation directed at the inversion layer that 1) compromises the distinctness of the its differentness; 2) interrupts the straight-line length of its differentness; and/or 3) compromises the flatness and/or smoothness of its differentness.
In a nutshell:
We can think of inversion layers that form in the lower atmosphere as sheets of fabric that can/will subsequently be rolled up to form a tube or vortex. If these sheets are of high quality (long, straight, smooth, and/or distinct) then the tubes that form from them will themselves be of high quality and will, thereby, be very proficient as conduits of energy, producing large destructive tornadoes. If, however, these sheets are of low quality (short, crooked, ragged (having holes), bumpy, and/or fuzzy) then the tubes that form from them will themselves be of low quality and will, thereby, be ineffective as conduits of energy, producing relatively benign, low energy storms and tornadoes (and more of them).
All in all, there are reasons for optimism with this new understanding of tornadogenesis. In addition to being relatively easy to locate and easy to get to, the layers of differentness that develop (during periods of calm weather) in the lower atmosphere are extremely fragile. The slightest perturbation destroys them. The downwash coming off the wings of an airplane, for example, is more than enough to destroy any differentness in its immediate vicinity. Moreover, the whole-scale destruction of these boundary layers of differentness may not be necessary to effectively mitigate tornadoes; in order to achieve rapid growth plasma vortices are dependent on finding a pathway of differentness that is long in addition to being distinct and smooth. By flying patterns with aircraft along these layers of differentness and allowing the downwash off the wings to divide these sleeping giants of differentness into segments, like cutting fabric, we may be able to interrupt the straight-line continuity of the differentness in these inversion layers. Theoretically, this will prevent the kind of runaway vortex plasma growth associated with large, high energy, storms and tornadoes.
Too Good to be True?
Does this all seem too simple? Can it really be this easy? Can the annual threat of large, destructive tornadoes actually be brought to an end with something so simple as deploying aircraft to fly directed patterns at designated altitudes during periods of high risk? It’s hard to imagine any reasonable person not being skeptical of such a claim. I myself am skeptical on this point. But just yesterday I came across something on Twitter that would suggest that, possibly, it is not as crazy as it sounds. I re-posted it yesterday (link). It is a chart indicating that, according to Steve Goddard, “The number of strong tornadoes has declined significantly since the 1950s.” As I mentioned in that post, this decline seems to correlate with the increase in commercial air traffic during the 1960s. Might this purported reduction in tornado strength be a result of the fact that we have, inadvertently, been mitigating (destroying) layers of differentness with commercial aircraft? In other words, might we have already been accidently mitigating large, destructive tornadoes?   Yes, I know, this is a stretch.   And, yes, I know, this reduction in tornado intensity is subtle. And, yes, I know it might be a measuring bias or have some other perfectly reasonable explanation. But, supposing it is true that we have inadvertently been mitigating against strong tornadoes with commercial aircraft just think what kind of reduction in tornado strength we might achieve if we were actually trying.
How You Can Help
As an organization Solving Tornadoes is in its infancy. If you would like to know more about how you can help bring an end to large, destructive tornadoes please follow this blog and follow us on twitter: @solvingtornadoe


________________


The Fourth Phase of Water
We make assumptions, and believe we are right about the assumptions; then we defend our assumptions and try to make someone else wrong.
Don Miguel Ruiz, Author
Sometimes people believe things that are nonsense because they have painted themselves into a corner with their assumptions and believing in nonsense is the only option that remains to save them from appearing to be complete fools.  The most stupefying myth in all of meteorology is the myth that steam can persist in our atmosphere. It is universally believed by all meteorologists yet, strangely, not one of them would claim knowledge of a test or experiment to demonstrate its validity. Stranger still, what little empirical evidence we do have decidedly indicates that the notion fails (also see this for discussion). This notion has evolved into a taboo within the disciplines that study the atmosphere, the primary champions and enforcers of this taboo being meteorologists, most of whom for which the issue is a mute point in that they exclusively work with synoptic charts (cold fronts, warm fronts and such, usually displayed on computer screens) and, therefore, the notion is never applied in the context of their daily duties. Only for a very small subset of meteorologists—those that deal with the severe weather and, even then, only those that deal with the theoretical aspects thereof—does this notion have any real significance. But for these few the effect is intellectually devastating, rendering them feckless, incapable to making any kind of real progress in the discipline. The theoretical aspects of the study of severe weather, therefore, have come to epitomize academic vapidity and there really isn’t much any of them can do about it in that belief in the concept is a prerequisite for being taken seriously by any of the various stakeholders in the discipline. But at least they don’t look like complete fools.
Meteorologists don’t refer to steam in the atmosphere they refer to convection. It is only when forced to explain the assumptions underlying convection (which involves application of Avogadro’s law) that they reluctantly reveal that they are assuming mono-molecular H2O (steam) in their models of convection. But if you attempt to get them to explain how they, supposedly, know that water can stay mono-molecular at temperatures below the boiling point of water, well, that’s when the game playing begins. Emotions run deep on this issue. So deep, in fact, that when one states facts that demonstrate the impossibility of steam playing a role (or even existing) in our atmosphere one can generally expect to be accused of being a fool and a liar. In this respect it is not unlike the concept of CO2 Forcing in climatology. It’s lack of empirical support is completely disregarded due to overwhelming political will that favors it. There is not, however, the ideological aspect to the notion that we find with the notion that CO2 causes global warming. There are not, for example, liberals telling us it is true and conservatives telling us it is false. And there is no greater agenda tied to it. Nobody believes that there are any catastrophic eventualities if anybody does or does not believe it. This too is strange in that unlike the highly speculative science associated with global warming, nobody disputes the more limited but very real catastrophic eventualities of severe weather.
Steam-based Convection Myth Fails to Predict
The story underlying the steam-based convection myth becomes stranger still when one considers how incredibly resilient this notion has been despite its failure to predict or anticipate new discoveries. Basically there have been three waves of new evidence (most of which being due to advances in aviation) that the steam-based convection model failed to predict.
The earliest of these three discoveries was the discovery of extreme turbulence at the top of thunderstorms.   This was surprising because up until then it had been assumed that as water molecules within a parcel of air combined with other water molecules in the colder air at the top of the troposphere the air parcel would become more dense.  And, consequently, it’s buoyancy–the assumed source of its power–would be neutralized. Additionally, when observed from the ground the tops of thunderstorms appeared to be benign, fluffy, and harmless. However, as explained in this article in Plane and Pilot Magazine, in reality there is nothing harmless about the activity at the top of thunderstorms:
Deep, moist convection, better known as thunderstorms, are the nemesis of all aircraft, big or small. Avoidance is mandatory. Many pilots, however, continue to find themselves tangled up in these giants, and very few live to tell about it.
From one that did live to tell about it, the following, entitled Science Inside and Out, involves the first hand testimony of a then new pilot, Joe Olsen, encountering thunderstorms on a solo flight in a small plane over Texas:
Entering the cloud felt like hitting a wall. Suddenly everything was white, it was raining from every direction and the wind was howling. There were massive vertical wind shears that rendered the instruments useless. The altitude, air speed, rate of climb and artificial horizon gauges were all bouncing peg to peg. “Flying by the seat of your pants” quickly becomes the over-riding instinct. You are now in vertigo and your butt thinks it knows where the Earth is. You are fooled by the changing gravity of the rapid up and down wind shear. You are surrounded by glowing white light and cannot see further than ten feet in any direction. The wings are shaking at beyond maximum design loading and the LAST thing you want is your BUTT flying the plane. The propeller is used to 110 mph wind from the nose, but is disturbed by the 200 mph up and down winds.
And from the online journal Physics Dot Org comes and excerpt from an article entitled Flying Into a Thunderstorm:
Some thunderstorms are so violent they pump air more than 60,000 feet above Earth’s surface, punching through a layer of atmosphere called the tropopause all the way into the stratosphere.
In the least one might expect that the failure of the steam-based convection model to predict the magnitude of this activity at the top of thunderclouds might have served to inspire them to open their minds to the possibility that processes other than just convection might be involved. But that appears to not be the case.
The second of the three waves of new evidence involved the discovery of jet streams during and after WWII.
According to Wikipedia:
Jet streams are fast flowing, narrow air currents found in the atmospheres of some planets, including Earth.[1] The main jet streams are located near the altitude of the tropopause, the transition between the troposphere and the stratosphere (where temperature increases with altitude).[2] The major jet streams on Earth are westerly winds (flowing west to east). Their paths typically have a meandering shape; jet streams may start, stop, split into two or more parts, combine into one stream, or flow in various directions including the opposite direction of most of the jet.
As with the activity observed at the top of thunderstorms, there is nothing about the discovery of the jet stream that was predicted or anticipated by the steam-based convection model of meteorology’s storm theory.  Again, one might think that this failure to predict might bring meteorologists to look at the steam-based convection model of storm theory with more scrutiny.  Or, even, that it might inspire them to look for alternative models.  But, once again, this seems to not have happened.
Lastly, and once again completely unpredicted by the steam-powered convection notions, was the discovery of clear air turbulence. Clear-air turbulence, as the name suggests, is turbulence that happens without any visual cues (clouds) whatsoever. According to the website How Stuff Works:
Even though pilots are taught to avoid turbulent air by looking for cumulus clouds, turbulence can strike even in the absence of clouds. This type of turbulence—especially dangerous because of its invisibility—is known as clear-air turbulence. It accounts for most turbulence-related injuries, mainly because pilots have no time to warn passengers and flight attendants to get strapped into their seats. Nearly 7 out of 10 turbulence incidents are the result of encounters with the clear-air variety.
According to Wikipedia:
The atmospheric region most susceptible to CAT is the high troposphere at altitudes of around 7,000–12,000 metres (23,000–39,000 ft) as it meets the tropopause. Here CAT is most frequently encountered in the regions of jet streams. At lower altitudes it may also occur near mountain ranges. Thin cirrus cloud can also indicate high probability of CAT.
Lines of cirrus perpendicular to the jet stream indicate possible CAT, especially if the ends of the cirrus are dispersed in which case the direction of dispersal can indicate if the CAT is stronger at the left or at the right of the jet stream.
64% of the non-light turbulences (not only CAT) are observed less than 150 nautical miles (280 km) away from the core of a jet stream.[9]
CAT is never produced in the stratosphere.
Forced to Choose Between Wrong and Ridiculously Wrong
As with the other shortcomings of the steam-based convection model that I delineated at the beginning of this post, this failure to predict the discovery of these three meteorological phenomena is not something for which meteorologists are remotely concerned or even generally aware.  All in all, they demonstrate an amazing ability to pretend not to notice the shortcomings of their theory and even to conceal it by, as I indicated, hiding the notion of steam within the less plainly absurd notion of convection.  And then, of course, there is the evasiveness and name calling directed at anybody that doesn’t play along with their desire to pretend not to notice. And yet, as mentioned previously, there appears to not be any kind of larger political agenda.  This leaves one scratching their head wondering what is at the root of these behaviors.
I think I can answer this question.  And my answer does not in any way involve accusations that meteorologists are in collusion, lacking in intelligence, or cynical.  Rather, I suggest, they are mistaken on one point of fact that has resulted in them making an omission.  And in that omission they have closed themselves off to to an element in their explanations without which it is impossible to make sense of what is actually observed in the atmosphere, leaving them to choose between explanatory approaches that are wrong and ridiculously wrong.  And it all has to do with how we envision water getting up high into the sky.
Here’s the thing.  The pervasiveness of H2O in all parts of the troposphere (from the surface all the way up to the stratosphere) is undeniable. Likewise, the pervasiveness of H2O in all weather events is equally undeniable.  Moreover, H2O is constantly falling out of the sky.  Thus, the number one job of a theoretical meteorologists is to explain how water, H2O, gets up into the sky. The explanatory elements that meteorologists must use to achieve this explanation are the following: dry air (N2 and O2, and other trace inert gasses) and the three phases of water, ice, liquid water, and gaseous water (steam). Obviously ice is not viable.  Ice only falls out of the sky.  Liquid water water is more viable in that it is commonly observed in the form of fog or clouds, visible droplets.  And, starting from evaporation, these can stay suspended in the air due to electrostatic forces, which are implications of N2 and O2.  However, electrostatic forces in and of themselves can only explain, at best, how liquid droplets of water (some so small they are invisible). what we commonly refer to as humidity, can get up to about 1,000 meters, 1,500 meters at most.  It is plainly observable what does the remainder of the work to get moisture up above 7,000 meters–storms.  And storms do this in a relatively rapid and dramatic manner, producing the sometimes violent updrafts that are such a hazard to aircraft.  So the issue can be reduced to the question as to what powers storms?  It would seem the answer must be obvious, buoyancy induced by steam, the gaseous phase of water, powers storms because there is nothing else that can possibly explain why moist air would begin to rise up through the drier surrounding air.  Moreover, there is nothing else that can explain why storms themselves tend to be so wet, selectively occurring in moist air.  Therefore, only steam can possibly explain how storms cause water–moist air–to rapidly get up above 7,000 meters.  Right?
Actually, no.  That is wrong.  There is something else that can/will explain the uplift of moist air observed in storms.  And it doesn’t involve steam whatsoever.  In fact, the assertion that steam cannot exist in our atmosphere is, in fact, true.  So the notion that steam provides the buoyancy of storms and/or the notion that buoyancy is the only force that can describe the uplift in storms and/or the notion that the only way water can provide uplift is through buoyancy are all false statements.  There is another force involved.  There is another way in which water can provide uplift in storms.  And the three atmospheric phenomena that I mentions above, 1) the turbulence at the top of thunderstorms, 2) the jet stream, and 3) clear-air turbulence, are big clues as to this other force.  In a follow-up post to this post I will demonstrate how one can start from the observation of CAT and track back through the jet stream, through to the tops of thunderclouds all the way down to the moist air (humidity) at lower altitudes and perfectly explain how this moist air begins to rapidly rise up into the upper troposphere (over 7.000 meters).  And at no time will this explanation require the existence of steam or buoyancy. (Note: It might be a while until I will have time for this follow-up post.  In the meantime there are two other posts on this blog that will give you a sense of where I am going with this: Tornado Solution Too Easy . . . andWhat You Never Suspected . . ., also there is my book, Solving Tornadoes, see link on sidebar.)
What is the mistake meteorologists have been making?  What is the conceptual error.  What is the omission?  As explained above, meteorologists assumed three phases of H2O.  They assumed ice, liquid water, and gaseous water, steam.  They did not know about, and frankly, could not have known about a fourth phase of water, plasma.  Nor could they have known about the structural capabilities that this plasma phase of water brings to our understanding of atmospheric processes.  And, consequently, they could not have known how these structural capabilities are the key to explaining the uplift of moist air witnessed in storms. And, therefore, they could not have known that there is a way to explain the uplift witnessed in storms that doesn’t require them to surrender their dignity.


________________


Dilemma of Differentness
This is an excerpt from my book Solving Tornadoes: Mastering the Mystery of the Vortex
Dilemma of Differentness
When I first started seriously pondering the molecular basis of V-plasma as being an undiscovered (or under-discovered) phase of water, a plasma, powered by an unknown, and potentially peculiarly form of agitation occurring naturally in the atmosphere, it was not without considerable forethought. Plasma brings capabilities that make sense in the context of structure in the atmosphere. Unlike either a gas or a liquid, plasma shares one attribute with solids, internal cohesiveness. IOW, Like a solid, plasma has resistance to external perturbation (resilience): the ability to take a form and maintain that form without having to be contained. In short, plasma has structural integrity (though usually much weaker [ephemeral] than that of most solids). Additionally, plasma can be as light as air. So, being a phase of matter that provides structural integrity and being light enough that it won’t fall out of the sky, plasma seemed to make sense.
If there was a genuine hidden plasma phase of water, one that is molecularly distinct and stable, I knew that it would only be identified if one was willing to wade through the conceptual confusion that swirled around conundrum of the H2O molecule’s hydrogen bond and related polarization neutralization. The more I studied water’s hydrogen bond and its implications the more it revealed a world of confusion. The confusion was a opportunity in one sense because it seemed entirely possible that this confusion concealed a discovery waiting to be made. But the confusion also presented the potential for me myself becoming more confused than it seemed I was already.
Fortunately there was nothing confusing about the source of power that I had envisioned for V-plasma. Being comprised of positively and negatively charged particles in an excited state, plasma requires a constant source of energy in order to emerge, persist, and grow. In no small part due to the fact that boundaries of large bodies of air can span hundreds of miles, wind shear, specifically the collision of molecules that takes place at/along shared boundaries of bodies of air moving at cross angles (opposite) to each other, was the only known atmospheric phenomena that can possibly produce the kind of sustained agitation of molecules necessary for such a plasma to persist, I reasoned. Most significantly, the inclusion of wind shear gave my thinking some conceptual focus on the nature of the agitation that I was attempting to visualize. Specifically, it defined a conceptual framework of air molecules colliding in kind of a side-long trajectory along a plane. From this came another strategy to tie the kite string of my thinking onto the reality of evidence. I decided that before I would get excited about any model for the molecular basis of V-plasma I would insist that it be able to resolve the dilemma of differentness.
The dilemma of differentness was something I’d been obsessed with long before my musings on V-plasma. When I would watch TV documentaries on tornadoes (NOVA and National Geographic) I always found myself waiting for the star of the show, differentness: specifically, differentness in moist/dry air along shear boundaries (warm, moist air flows up from the Gulf of Mexico and the cold, dry air flows over the Rockies, meeting in tornado alley). Specifically, differentness had to do with the fact that tornadoes and thunderstorms are not just associated with wind shear, but with wind shear in which one of the bodies of air is moist (high suspended H2O level) and the other is dry (low suspended H2O level). Why do tornadoes and thunderstorms show up so rapidly when the shear involves difference in humidity and not just differences in speed/direction of flow? To me this was much more than just a rhetorical question. I was sure that the answer would tell us something profound about tornadoes.
We can think of the dilemma of differentness as a thought experiment. Imagine three boxes of equal size. These boxes have no sides so air runs through them freely. Imagine each box encapsulates a different but similar section of wind shear (boundary between two bodies going in different directions). And, let’s say that these boundaries bisect the boxes at the same angle. In the first box both bodies of air are desiccate (dry). In the second both bodies of air are moisture laden. In the third box, one of the bodies of air is dry and the other is moisture laden. Any theoretical derivation of the specific molecular dynamics of V-plasma had to indicate the emergence of V-plasma in the third box only. If it emerged in either the first or the second, even if it also emerged in the third also, it failed to resolve the moist/dry differentness dilemma, and would be rejected accordingly.
With that in mind I set upon . . .
Continued


________________


Conservation of Energy in Earth’s Atmosphere
There is not a more important (and poorly understood) concept in tornadogenesis than how the atmosphere stores and delivers energy to cause storms.  Specifically, if the atmosphere did not have both the ability to store energy and transport that stored energy then severe weather could not and would not exist. Despite its absurdities (most notably, “cold steam“) and absence of supporting evidence, as discussed on other posts on this blog, meteorologists continue to pretend that they believe that the origins of the energy associated with severe weather comes from convection.  Wanting only to conceal its shortcomings and maintain the subterfuge that keeps the grant money rolling in so that they can continue to go to conferences and give each other awards, meteorologists are very careful to sidestep the whole discussion.
Taking a cue from them, I am going to pretend that they are real scientists and, in the spirit of scientific discourse, they have presented me with a challenge: If convection is wrong then what is right? More explicitly, if my claim that the energy of storms does not come from convection then from where does it come, in my estimation?  I see this issue being split up into two issues that can be addressed independently: 1) How and why is energy conserved (stored) in our atmosphere; 2) How and why is the conserved (stored) energy transported to certain locations on our planet to create storms, tornadoes, and hurricanes. In this post I will be discussing the first.  The second will be presented in a post that follows this post.
For most people when they hear the concept conservation of energy their minds fog over.  The phrase tends to be used in the context of thermodynamics and fluid dynamics and, otherwise, it sounds technical and sciencey.  But actually it is a simple concept to comprehend.  If you understand the concept of reflection you understand the concept of conservation of energy in gasses. For example, when a balloon is blown up the energy used to inflate the balloon is reflected back into the body of the balloon by the structure of the balloon.  Thus, it is said to be conserved, saved.  In this case the structure of the balloon completely encapsulates its contents.  There are other forms of conservation of energy in gasses that don’t involve complete encapsulation.  Stream flow down a tube, for instance, is a form of conservation of energy in which the energy of the flow is reflected back into the flow by the structure of the tube.  Additionally, if there is a difference in pressure between the entrance and exit of the tube and the walls of the tube are smooth the air within the tube can accelerate. In the context of a large body of gas the tube can be said to isolate the contents of the tube from the friction (energy absorbency and molecular dispersion) that is otherwise associated with the flow of gasses through gasses.
As suggested above, structure is essential to conservation of energy in a gaseous body like the atmosphere.  Without structure there can be no encapsulation. And only if that structure is resilient (non-absorbent) can it be reflective. Therefore, if a stream is observed in the context of a gaseous body, like the atmosphere, there must be structure and the structure must be resilient. The jet stream, therefore, could not exist if it did not have tubular walls with genuine structural integrity and resilience. In other words, a jet stream in our atmosphere could not exist if it did not have the ability to isolate its contents from the friction that all gasses experience when flowing through gasses. Likewise, high wind speeds that are observed in our atmosphere would not be possible if the walls were not smooth enough to allow the air therein to accelerate unobstructed. Therefore, tubular structures with resilient, smooth inner walls must exist in our atmosphere. This creates a quandary or mystery. Where is it? Why is it not plainly observable? Is it invisible?  Is it subtle? Is it temporary? My answer is, yes, yes, and yes.  It is invisible because its primary component of composition is H2O, which is clear.  And it is temporary and subtle because it only comes into existence under conditions of high energy wind shear. (Also, its existence is usually obstructed by clouds—the cone of a tornado being the rare exception when structure is plainly observable.)
Being a non-Newtonian fluid (link) water’s molecules actually become stronger when they are structurally detached from other water molecules. This seems strange to us because we normally think of a substance becoming stronger when it becomes attached to other molecules.  We refer to these other substances as solids.  The strength of a solid becomes more apparent to us the more its molecules become inter-attached because the more its molecules become inter-attached the larger and, therefore, more apparent they are to us. In actuality these molecules don’t become stronger when their molecules become inter-attached to each other. The strength of a silica molecule, for example, does not increase when it becomes attached through covalent bonds to other silica molecules. The strength—the electromagnet force that each molecule emits—stays the same. The same is not the case with water.  Water molecules do not form covalent bonds with each other.  The bonds H2O molecules form with one another are hydrogen bonds.  The strength of these hydrogen bonds is a function of the residual polarity of each of the water molecules that share a bond.  Strangely, one quarter fraction of this polarity is neutralized with each of four potential hydrogen bonds a water molecule might share with up to four other water molecules.  Consequently, the strongest bond that can exist between any two water molecules is one in which both of the water molecules share no other hydrogen bonds with any other water molecule.  And the weakest hydrogen bond any two can share is when both water molecules also share hydrogen bonds with three other water molecules.  This is the reason, then, that liquid water actually becomes weakest (its molecules becomes electromagnetically neutral) and most fluid when it becomes most dense. And it is strongest (its molecules become most electromagnetically active) when it is least dense. H2O molecules are, therefore, strongest—have the greatest electromagnetic force—when they are completely unattached, singular, as in steam.
And so, any activity or energy that separates water molecules from one another actually activates their strength (it activates the polarity that underlies their electromagnetic activity). There are two ways to break these bonds and, thereby, re-activate the polarity in water molecules.  One way—the most obvious way—is to heat it above the boiling point of water.  When this happens the force (kinetic heat, inter-molecular agitation) associated with driving the H2O molecules apart is greater than the force of the polarity that is trying to pull them back together to re-establish hydrogen bonds (and, thereby, neutralize their polarity again).  And, since the force associated with pulling them apart is greater than the force associated with pulling them back together each water molecule acts as a separate entity.  It, therefore, is a gas.  We call this gas steam.
There is no steam in our atmosphere and even if there was it wouldn’t make any difference to the premise of this post in that being a gas steam has no surface and, therefore, is not able to make a contribution to the conservation of energy in our atmosphere.  (This is true for all gasses.) As indicated above, in order to conserve energy in a flow a substance must have both a surface, the surface must have some resilience to reflect energy back into the flow, and it must have the ability to take a tubular shape that contains or isolates the flow from the friction that gasses normally experience when moving through gasses. Liquid water has a surface but it does not have the ability to take a tubular shape. Additionally, the liquid form of water has had its polarity neutralized by the formation of hydrogen bonds between adjoining H2O molecules, so it is structurally very weak and will absorb energy rather than reflect the energy back into the flow. Ice, the solid phase of water, does exist in our atmosphere.  It tends for form into snow flakes or hail.  Ice does have a surface and it does have high amounts of resilience (strength) to reflect energy back into a flow.  But even though it is conceivable that it could be shaped into a tube the fact is that it just doesn’t take that form.  And if it did there would be another problem, ice is rigid, inflexible, and fragile (or, otherwise, so thick and heavy it falls out of the air), all qualities that make it ineffective for conserving energy in a flow.
It would seem at this point that our investigation is done.  We have examined water in its different phases (gas, liquid and solid) and it has failed.  We, therefore, have no way of explaining the origins of structure and, therefore, no way of explaining the existence of streams that run through gasses, like jet streams, and no way of explaining the mechanism of conservation of energy in our atmosphere.  Right?  Well, wait a minute.  There is just one thing.  Above we mentioned that there are, “. . . two ways to break these bonds and, thereby, re-activate the polarity in water molecules.”  But so far we have only discussed one way, heating.  What is the second of the two ways to break these bonds and, thereby, re-activate the polarity in water molecules?  And what other implications might we find with this second method? The second way involves centrifugal force—spinning.  As miniature water droplets/clusters spin they start to elongate into chains.  As they elongate hydrogen bonds are being broken, activating the polarity of the molecules in the chain—activating them electromagnetically.  Specifically, the H2O molecules will go from having three and four bonds with the other H2O molecules in their droplet/cluster to having two and one in the elongated chain/cluster.  (Two for each molecule in the midsection [non-ends] of each chain and one for each molecule at each end of the chain.) Immediately it is apparent that this is a different situation than was the case for gaseous phase of H2O.  As mentioned above, with the gaseous phase of H2O the amount of force (kinetic heat, inter-molecular agitation) that is driving them apart is greater than that (the reactivated electromagnetic forces of its polarity) pulling them together, resulting in it being a gas that is incapable of having a surface (structural resilience) and/or conserving (reflecting) energy. But this is different.  Now, with centrifugal force (spinning) the force that is pulling them together—the hydrogen bonds shared between each H2O molecule in the chain—is greater than the force that is driving them apart. This produces a substance that is similar to a gas but is not a gas.  The word that best describes this type of substance is the word plasma.
If you look up the word plasma you will see that a plasma is said to involve very hot, highly charged particles (some positive and some negative) that have a source of incoming energy that drives the particles apart. The charged particles exert an internal force that is greater than the force pushing them apart. Likewise, with this newly theorized form of H2O plasma each water molecule is itself both a negative (oxygen side of the water molecule) and a positive (hydrogen side of the water molecule) and as long as the spinning is maintained their polarity will remain activated since hydrogen bonds will not have been completed—so these will be highly charged particles.  (Note: although the molecules in these spinning chains are not as highly charged as the H2O molecules in steam they are highly charged compared to the relatively inert N2, O2 molecules that comprise the bulk of the atmosphere.) If we imagine billions and billions of these spinning chains of water molecules what results is a substance with some unique properties in regards to conservation of energy. Unlike a gas and like a solid, an H2O plasma has the ability to form a surface.  And unlike a liquid, the surface has resilience and, therefore, will not absorb energy but will reflect it back into a flow to, thereby, conserve it. Additionally, unlike ice, the plasma form of H2O is very flexible, pliable, and is, therefore, not fragile.  And it is as light as gas, so we don’t have to be concerned about it falling out of the sky.
This leaves two other requirements.  Firstly, how can we envision this having a constant (or somewhat constant) source of incoming energy so that the spinning can be sustained over extended periods of time and, secondly, how can we envision this plasma taking a tubular shape so that it continues to reflect energy back into a stream flow, as is seen in jet streams?  The answer to both of these questions is wind shear, specifically wind shear between bodies of air in which one body of air is dry and the other is moist. Why wind shear and why does it matter that one body of air is dry and the other is moist? Moist air is necessary as a source of the miniature droplets that can begin spinning and elongating into chains of polarity activated H2O molecules.  Wind shear along a relatively smooth and long surface is necessary as a source of the energy that will, essentially, bombard the droplets with side-glancing impacts from air molecules (N2 and O2) so that the spinning can be initiated and sustained.  And the other body of air must be dry because if it is not then any clusters/droplets of moisture that it contains will, firstly, have a tendency to begin spinning in the opposite direction from the clusters/droplets in the original body of air and, secondly, upon impact combine with them and, thereby, neutralize each other’s spin, cancelling out the effect. Lastly, (for reasons that are not completely clear to me) a smooth surface of wind shear will, as a result of flow dynamics (possibly the Bernoulli effect and/or corrialis effect are involved), begin to fold over and around itself, eventually producing a very stable and energetically efficient tube, that will tend to grow—partly as a result of it having a surplus of energy with which to grow—along the length of a moist/dry wind shear boundary.
The jet streams, therefore, are the entities in our atmosphere that conserve energy. All that is needed for a jet stream to come into existence is a moist/dry boundary layer and a pressure differential as the source of energy. Pressure differentials on our planet are created by differential heating by the sun.  And the boundary between the bottom of the very dry stratosphere and the top of the relatively moist troposphere (which varies between 7,000 meters in height and 12,000 meters, depending on latitude and underlying atmospheric conditions) presents us with a vast moist/dry boundary that encircles out planet. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that the jet stream is found here.
This explains the origins of the energy (high wind speeds) associated with severe weather.  In the next post we will discuss how and why the conserved (stored) energy is transported to certain locations on our planet to create storms, tornadoes, and hurricanes.


________________


Polarity Neutralization Implication of Hydrogen Bonds Between Water Molecules and Groups Thereof
General Confusion Surrounding Hydrogen Bonds and Polarity in Water Molecules
There is a lot of confusion about implications of hydrogen bonds that are shared between water molecules in water. There seems to be contradictory messages.  Some have described the bonds that exists between H2O molecules in liquid water as very weak, thus allowing for the fluidity and gentle character of water.  Others draw attention to the high boiling point of H2O, it being much higher than that of its two constituents hydrogen and oxygen.  Moreover, this dichotomy is not only evident in the strength of the hydrogen bonds between H2O molecules, it is also reflected in the surface tension (the residual electromagnetic energy) that is produced by H2O molecules.  In liquid water this surface tension is very slight, almost nonexistent.  In the gaseous phase of water, steam, the surface tension emitted by each H2O molecule is high.
So then, which is it?  Are the hydrogen bonds that exist between water molecules weak and is their surface tension slight or are the hydrogen bonds strong and the surface tension they emit strong?  It can’t be both, can it?  Well, actually, yes, it can be both and in fact it is both.  To understand why it is both you first have to understand a concept I refer to as the Polarity Neutralization Implication of Hydrogen Bonds Between Water Molecules and Groups Thereof. To understand how this works you first have to understand that both the strength of the bond an H2O molecule contributes to any shared hydrogen bond it has with another H2O molecule and the strength of the surface tension produced by that same H2O molecule is a result (is a function of) the polarity of the H2O molecule.  This is a simple enough concept.  Most people have no trouble grasping this.  Where it gets confusing is that people assume that polarity is a constant and it’s not.
Polarity is a Variable 
Polarity is a variable.  And the mechanism that alters (reduces) the polarity of H2O molecules is the completion of hydrogen bonds with adjoining water molecules. Consequently the strength (polarity) of the H2O molecule is neutralized in liquid water since most (not all) hydrogen bonds have been completed in most (not all) of the water molecules in the liquid.  The strongest (most electro-magnetically active) form of an H2O molecule is when it is by itself, as in steam, because none of its polarity has been neutralized by hydrogen bonds. (Note: the H2O molecules in steam, having their full polarity, have 20 to 80 times* the magnitude of electro-magnetic energy than does the H2O molecules in liquid water.) And therefore the strongest hydrogen bond that can exist between any two water molecules is one in which both of the water molecules share no other hydrogen bonds with any other water molecule.  And the weakest hydrogen bond any two can share is when both water molecules also share hydrogen bonds with three other water molecules. Likewise, the H2O molecule produces 20 to 80 times* the surface tension when it is by itself (as in steam) as it does when it is in liquid water.
* Why do I say “20 to 80 times?” Because I don’t know the correct amount. It is a guesstimate.  The reasoning that underlies this guesstimate is something I may present in another post. Frankly, the whole subject of hydrogen bonding and polarity is obscure—at least to me. I scoured various physics papers on the subject—most having been written by Chinese graduate students—and these have, I admit, left me somewhat confused. I highly encourage anybody to do  their own research and, hopefully, improve upon my limited ability to explain what I don’t fully understand.
So, H2O molecules are strong (high bond strength and high surface tension) individually (when at full polarity) and weak (polarity neutralized by hydrogen bonds) collectively.  Polarity is not a constant.  It is a variable.  Hydrogen bonds are the mechanism that neutralize polarity and the breaking of hydrogen bonds (ie. heating, agitation and/or spinning [see my blog post entitled Conservation of Energy in Earth’s Atmosphere]) is the mechanism that activates (reactivates) polarity.
Impossibility of Cold Steam in Earth’s Atmosphere
One of the implications that results from this phenomena (Polarity Neutralization Implication of Hydrogen Bonds Between Water Molecules and Groups Thereof) is to dictate the impossibility of there being any steam (mono-molecular H2O) in the atmosphere.  Our atmosphere is far too cold and the individual H2O molecules are far too electro-magnetically active (as mentioned above, they are as much as 80 times more electromagnetically active than in liquid water) for this to be possible. Nevertheless people continue to assume that the moisture in moist air is mono-molecular H2O (steam) when in actuality that is physically impossible. There are many reasons that people make the mistake of assuming that water can remain mono-molecular at the ambient temperatures:
1) They are unaware of  the Polarity Neutralization Implication of Hydrogen Bonds Between Water Molecules and Groups Thereof.  Specifically, they observe the benign nature of liquid water and extrapolate this observed weakness to molecular H2O, not realizing that individually and in very small clusters (under 10) the H2O molecule produces high electro-magnetic energy that makes staying singular or small virtually impossible.
2) They assume that since steam is clear that air that is clear must also contain steam (mono-molecular H2O).  They fail to consider the possibility that miniature droplets/clusters (10 to 25 molecules per cluster/droplet) might also be invisible when mixed in with air.
3) They are uneducated in chemistry and physics and, therefore, do not realize that concepts like the temperature at which a substance boils is not flexible/transitory. (The thing that is especially perplexing to me about this one is how physicists and chemists didn’t notice this absurdity being put forth by meteorologists.)
4) They are confused about the concepts of partial pressure and/or vapor pressure.
5) They get on the internet and go to Wikipedia which completely fails to draw any kind of distinction between steam (mono-molecular H2O) and vapor which sometimes denotes steam and other times denotes a mixture of dry air with unspecified (either or both mono-molecular or multi-molecular) H2O.
6) They graduated from a meteorology program and, therefore, the distinction between mono-molecular H2O and multi-molecular H2O was never delineated or discussed and, consequently, they graduated with the false confidence that the distinction is irrelevant.
(Note: meteorology has built a cult understanding around the concept of convection.  The dirty little secret hidden inside the notion of convection is the assumption that “cold steam” (mono-molecular H2O) persists in our atmosphere. This is not something that is ever discussed by meteorologists. It’s a taboo subject.  A student or graduate of a meteorology program that does not honor this taboo might, for example, find themselves at odds with faculty or even denied opportunities for employment.)
7) They are unaware that the notion has never been tested or measured.  (Many falsely believe the notion has been tested and measured. One might even say that it is somewhat of an urban legend in that there are some that claim to have seen confirmatory tests and measurements in high school and college textbooks. However, like sightings of bigfoot, these reports have thus far failed to be confirmed.)
8) Despite the availability of terminology that is perfectly descriptive and that carries no ambiguity, they stubbornly insist on using ambiguous terminology.  This confounds their ability to fully grasp the complexities of the subject and, consequently, they lose patience and resign themselves to a less accurate but simpler understanding.  (The biggest culprit is the phrase, “water vapor,” See #5 above for details.)
9) They haven’t thought about it. (I suspect this may be the most prevalent of all.)
Spinning of Chains of H2O to Create Structural Plasma That Conserves Energy in a Stream Flow
In my post entitled Conservation of Energy in Earth’s Atmosphere I describe how the spinning of water droplets/clusters—a direct result of wind shear—causes these droplets to elongate into chains of partially reactivated H2O molecules, effectuating a plasma with structural integrity. It is important to note that without the concept that is the subject of this post (the Polarity Neutralization Implication of Hydrogen Bonds Between Water Molecules and Groups Thereof) this would not be possible. Specifically, without the increase in polarity that results from the breaking of two of each H2O molecules four bonds (breaking of three of four bonds on the H2O molecules at the ends of each chain) as the chains lengthen, the remaining bonds within the chain would (theoretically) not have the strength to maintain a bond when subjected to the centrifugal force of the spinning.  Likewise, without the increased polarity and the ensuing increase in surface tension that results from two of its four bonds having been broken in the context of the chain, the molecules within the chains would not produce enough surface tension (electro-magnetic energy) so that these chains can collectively maintain structural cohesiveness as a plasma and the plasma would, therefore, not have the resilience to be effective at reflecting energy back into the flow of a jet stream to achieve conservation of energy in earth’s atmosphere, as explained therein. (Note: I highly recommend that you read Conservation of Energy in Earth’s Atmosphere).
Meteorology's abject failure to understand the structural capabilities of the H2O molecule and implications thereof is the number one reason that people still die in tornadoes.
But meteorologists have a really good excuse: water's structural capabilities are almost completely hidden from view. This view is further obscured by complex descriptions from physicist that aren't intellectually digestible to the average meteorologist. Towards the end of clarifying the water molecule's structural capabilities, let's compare the H2O molecule's structural capabilities to those of another compound molecule, silica. Imagine two globs of each, let's say 25 molecules per glob. At ambient temperatures water is a liquid and silica is a solid. Both have surface tension. That is, both have the ability to collectively absorb energy and spread it to the other members of its glob so that they act as a singular entity, more or less. Of course with water, a liquid, this surface tension is much less than it is with silica, a solid. But here is what is strange about the H2O molecule. If you break one molecule off of the silica glob the electro magnetic forces of that silica molecule are the same as they were when that molecule of silica was attached to the glob. But with water something very different is the case. If you break one molecule off of the H2O glob it now possesses electromagnetic forces that are more similar to those of the silica molecule than it does to the other molecules from the H2O glob!
What does this mean in regards to water's role with respect to structure in the atmosphere? It means that there are surface tensions hidden inside water that only become active when individual water molecules are detached (or relatively detached [this is important]) from other water molecules. Mathematically this is what it amounts to: in silica and most solids an increase in surface area causes surface tension to increase at a linear rate; in water an increase in surface area causes an increase in surface tension at an exponential rate (see chart):
In other words, situational factors that cause water to become detached or relatively detached from other water molecules or globs thereof cause the activation of the electro magnetic forces associated with H2O molecule's surface tension. What kind of situational factors? One situational factor can be its temperature. Above 100 degrees Celsius the linear velocity of the H2O molecules is so great that they bounce off one another and can't maintain a hydrogen bond, thus maximizing their collective surface area. Accordingly, steam is the phase of water that has the highest surface area and, therefore, the highest surface tension. But, of course, our atmosphere is not hot enough to support the existence of steam and steam is a gas and gasses don't have a surface. For both of these reasons, then, steam is not a good candidate for structure (surface tension on steroids) in our atmosphere. But temperature (heat, linear velocity of individual molecules) is not the only situational factor that can increase the surface area of water. Another situational factor is vibration or jostling, as in white water. But for reasons that will be discussed more explicitly in the next chapter, jostling and/or vibrations are very temporary (unstable) and energetically ineffective at increasing (and maintaining) the surface area of water. And this is where most people stop when it comes to theorizing the H2O molecule's role as the basis of structure in our atmosphere. They fail to consider that there might be a third form of agitation, a form of agitation that allows for the existence of a plasma. And that is important because, unlike a gas, a plasma has a surface, and like a solid a plasma has the ability to maintain form (compressive strength), both of which are essential for any structural element.
As I indicated, all of this will be discussed in the next chapter, not this chapter. Why then, you may be wondering, do I bring that up here and now? Well, firstly, I think it's important not to let this notion of surface tension on steroids remain obscure. It is the most important
concept in this book. And I'm concerned that if I let this notion languish I might lose my audience. Secondly, I want you, the audience, to know that if you are so inclined you can skip the rest of this chapter with little loss in understanding of the new thinking being introduced in this book. The purpose of the rest of this chapter is to expose the current paradigm, the convection model of storm theory, as being the denialist nonsense that it truly is. Therefore, if you have been indoctrinated into the current  meteorological paradigm reading the rest of this chapter is essential.
While on the subject of paradigms, I think of any scientific paradigm as a container with a certain capacity. Once that capacity has been achieved there is simply no room for new thinking. Only after it has been emptied can the container be filled with new thinking. The purpose of this chapter is, in that respect, to empty the container. And for reasons that have much to do with achieving this, a big part of what is involved with this chapter involves getting you, the audience, to begin to visualize structure in our atmosphere. In other words, I am not going to just be telling you what is wrong with the current paradigm of storm theory. I'm also going to be helping you see what is right. And, as I stated above, you can elect to skip this chapter, for the time being. In the next chapter, chapter four, I will introduce my explanation of the molecular basis of structure in the atmosphere (surface tension on steroids). With this understanding in hand, we will move to the fifth and (at this time) final chapter of this book where we will apply this newly obtained insight to establish a principle that will lead us to a simple and straightforward approach to mitigating large, violent tornadoes.
One last procedural point before the dialogue continues. For reasons discussed in the first chapter, (ref #3) for the rest of this chapter I will employ the following dumbed down, deliberately simplified version of the theoretical thinking being introduced in this book (first presented in the previous chapter):
1) Imagine a plasma with the strength, pliability, and rigidity of wet clay but weighing about the same as air. We can refer to this substance as vortex plasma, or V-plasma for short.
2) Imagine V-plasma existing in inch thick sheets. These sheets can be rolled onto themselves, forming tubes of varying circumferences.
3) Having a diameter, generally, larger than ten feet and smaller than fifty feet, these tubes of V-plasma exist high in the sky at the top of the troposphere, extending laterally over great distances. They can grow organically, break in half, split off, rejoin and even extend down into the lower parts of the troposphere.


When I first started seriously pondering the molecular basis of V-plasma as being an undiscovered (or under-discovered) phase of water, a plasma, powered by an unknown, and potentially peculiarly form of agitation occurring naturally in the atmosphere, it was not without considerable forethought. Plasma brings capabilities that make sense in the context of structure in the atmosphere. Unlike either a gas or a liquid, plasma shares one attribute with solids, internal cohesiveness. IOW, Like a solid, plasma has resistance to external perturbation (resilience): the ability to take a form and maintain that form without having to be contained. In short, plasma has structural integrity (though usually much weaker [ephemeral] than that of most solids). Additionally, plasma can be as light as air. So, being a phase of matter that provides structural integrity and being light enough that it won't fall out of the sky, plasma seemed to make sense.
If there was a genuine hidden plasma phase of water, one that is molecularly distinct and stable, I knew that it would only be identified if one was willing to wade through the conceptual confusion that swirled around conundrum of the H2O molecule's hydrogen bond and related polarization neutralization. The more I studied water's hydrogen bond and its implications the more it revealed a world of confusion. The confusion was a opportunity in one sense because it seemed entirely possible that this confusion concealed a discovery waiting to be made. But the confusion also presented the potential for me myself becoming more confused than it seemed I was already.
Fortunately there was nothing confusing about the source of power that I had envisioned for V-plasma. From this came another strategy to tie the kite string of my thinking onto the reality of evidence. I decided that before I would get excited about any model for the molecular basis of V-plasma I would insist that it be able to resolve the dilemma of differentness.
The dilemma of differentness was something I'd been obsessed with long before my musings on V-plasma. When I would watch TV documentaries on tornadoes (NOVA and National Geographic) I always found myself waiting for the star of the show, differentness: specifically, differentness in moist/dry air along shear boundaries (warm, moist air flows up from the Gulf of Mexico and the cold, dry air flows over the Rockies, meeting in tornado alley). Specifically, differentness had to do with the fact that tornadoes and thunderstorms are not just associated with wind shear, but with wind shear in which one of the bodies of air is moist (high
suspended H2O level) and the other is dry (low suspended H2O level). Why do tornadoes and thunderstorms show up so rapidly when the shear involves difference in humidity and not just differences in speed/direction of flow? To me this was much more than just a rhetorical question. I was sure that the answer would tell us something profound about tornadoes.
We can think of the dilemma of differentness as a thought experiment. Imagine three boxes of equal size. These boxes have no sides so air runs through them freely. Imagine each box encapsulates a different but similar section of wind shear (boundary between two bodies going in different directions). And, let's say that these boundaries bisect the boxes at the same angle. In the first box both bodies of air are desiccate (dry). In the second both bodies of air are moisture laden. In the third box, one of the bodies of air is dry and the other is moisture laden. Any theoretical derivation of the specific molecular dynamics of V-plasma had to indicate the emergence of V-plasma in the third box only. If it emerged in either the first or the second, even if it also emerged in the third also, it failed to resolve the moist/dry differentness dilemma, and would be rejected accordingly.
Let's do an exercise. Imagine the box below contains 2000 air molecules. The majority of the air molecules, 98% (79% N2 and 19% O2) are represented by the shading in the box. Draw 40 dots (the remaining 2%) in the box to represent the water molecules. Draw these dots as you think they would occur (be arranged) in nature, under ambient temperatures. If you want, you can then write a sentence or two describing your reasoning. There are right and wrong answers. Look to the end of this chapter for the correct answers.
Did you get the right answer? If you did you can, probably, skip the next couple of paragraphs—but I suggest you don't. If you didn't then, hopefully, this realization should open your mind to the possibility that there is something about the water molecule that you don't understand.
On a molecular level water is very aggressive about getting together with other water molecules to become decidedly unaggressive. We mostly notice the result of the water molecule's aggression, its complete lack of aggression, and we are, therefore, mostly unaware of how incredibly aggressive it, the H2O molecule, can be to become unaggressive. More specifically, the H2O molecule's aggression is a result of its inherit polarity and the electromagnet implications thereof: as water, on the molecular level, aggressively seeks out connections with other water molecules, The strength and persistence of these forces cause it to collectively (in the form of liquid water) to become more interconnected molecularly, more entangled, denser. And that's where things get strange. Because the more entangled and denser it (water) becomes (the more bonds are achieved between molecules of H2O) the more the forces that caused it to become entangled are neutralized, turned off, resulting in the high fluidity (low viscosity) of water. In a sense, H2O molecules are in a great big hurry to surround themselves with other H2O molecules (by way of hydrogen bond connections at all four locations of their structure) so that they can treat other H2O molecules with (almost) complete indifference.
The mechanism that underlies this strange passive-aggressive behavior of the water molecule—this individual tendency to aggressively seek to become collectively unaggressive—might best be understood with respect to the fact that the bond that takes place between water molecules is a hydrogen bond. Unlike a covalent bonds, water's hydrogen bond is the result of (a function of) the polarity of the two H2O molecules that are participants in the bond. However, and in complete contrast to a covalent bond, when a hydrogen bond is achieved a fraction of the polarity is neutralized, turned off, in both of the two H2O molecules that participate in the hydrogen bond. So, ironically, the achievement of a hydrogen bond (and each H2O molecule can participate in up to four bonds, each with a different H2O molecule) is at one and the same time the result of the water molecule's polarity and the (partial) neutralization thereof.
This tendency to become entangled, to aggressively fold in on itself, and to, thereby, neutralize its polarity as it becomes entangled is so effective and so instantaneous (and happening on such a such a microscopic scale) that we are mostly unaware of the H2O molecule's underlying ability to produce some fairly significant electromagnetic forces (surface tension) and bond strength (tensile strength). (Note: liquid water's hydrogen bond offer's no compressive strength whatsoever.) All in all, what it really comes down to is this: H2O molecules are so effective at getting together with other H2O molecules and neutralizing the polarity that brought them together, we (us humans) generally are unaware of the possibility that if a mechanism can be theorized (or experimentally revealed) that will defeat the H2O molecule's aggressive and insidious tendency to collectively fold in on itself and, thereby, neutralize its polarity, then these structural capabilities can emerge (there are two: [a.] bond strength [tensile strength only] and [b.] surface tension).
In a sense H2O is like a superhero. It's superpowers are concealed from us by its
ability to blend in with a crowd of other depolarized, mild mannered H2O molecules. Its true strength is only revealed when events tear it away from the crowd. Only when alone do water's superpowers emerge. And that is the case with vortex plasma, except not so extreme in this case. As some of the more recent movie superheroes are finding, sometimes working in small groups, clusters, chains of molecules, teams of superheroes, can be very effective.
One of the results of my examination of the H2O molecule and its hydrogen bond was the realization that singular molecules of water (steam) could not possibly stay singular in our atmosphere at ambient temperatures, this being the point of the above exercise. The high polarity of the individual H2O molecule is far too great. Water in the atmosphere would have to consist of clumps. (My guess is 10 to 60 molecules per cluster). Always. No exceptions. This forced me to consider what would happen to clusters that were subjected to side-glancing impacts like those we expect at wind shear boundaries. From this came the idea that these cluster/droplets might start spinning, faster and faster as they are continuously bombarded by side-glancing impacts. From this came the idea that the centrifugal force of spinning might cause the droplet/cluster to elongate into a chain. And, from this came the realization that I now I had a mechanism to describe the origins of the surface tension that I envisioned for V-plasma. Spinning chains of H2O molecules defeat the H2O molecule's aggressive and insidious tendency to fold in on itself. And since folding in on itself is what neutralizes H2O's tensile strength and surface tension the spinning, essentially, activated them. I was starting to suspect that I had found the origins of surface tension on steroids—a phase of H2O, a plasma, that has high surface tension and high internal cohesiveness as well.
Of course this notion brought to mind all kinds of questions that don't have obvious or easy answers. Could something like this be stable? Sustainable? Chains of molecules (10 to 60 molecules in length) spinning end over end, conserves momentum as a consequence of the spinning. I reasoned that this, possibly, is what allows this newly theorized phase of H2O, a plasma, the constancy and persistence that is necessary for any state of matter, especially one that we would want to describe as having structural integrity. Additionally, the gyroscopic effect of these spinning chains of H2O in concert with the law of conservation of angular momentum seemed to offer an explanation for how/why a substance (H2O) that has zero compressive strength when in the liquid state can manifest compressive strength when in the plasma state.
I also noticed other aspects of this thinking that seemed complimentary. Water droplets/clusters are remarkably well suited to absorbing kinetic energy from molecular impact. They are like bowling pins or pool balls that set themselves up again the instant after they are struck, reestablishing close proximity with one another, seemingly preparing for the next impact. Any net spin, the result of a side glancing impact, would be conserved, like a spinning ice skater. Moreover, as the molecules in the cluster began to absorb more and more energy from side glancing impacts, spinning faster and faster, it seemed the cluster would naturally tend unravel into a chain. As side bonds are broken each water molecule in a chain goes from having four (or, some, three) bonds to two and (at ends of each chain) one. And as polarity is regained tensional bond strength and surface tension are, essentially, reactivated.
Note: the assertion that the bonds get stronger as a cluster unravels is due to the fact that as each molecule goes from 4 connections to 3 to 2 its polarity increases and, consequently, bond strength increases, the strongest connections being at the end of every chain
since the ends have only one bond and, therefore, have the highest polarity in the chain. See figure:
All in all, water droplets are nature's perfect spinners. When they are weakest (liquid) they are very compact and, therefore, good absorbers of energy from collisions with other molecules. And as they spin and unravel (plasma) they get stronger. Just think if it was the other way around (as is the case for most substances). If it was strong when compact they wouldn't absorb energy they would reflect it. Secondly, if they got weaker as they got more elongated they would tend to break apart.
But does it resolve the dilemma of differentness? You can go ahead and do your own thought experiment. Consider what would happen when only one of the two bodies of air along a wind shear boundary have suspended clusters/droplets versus what would happen when both have suspended clusters/droplets. I think you will come to the same conclusion that I did, 


when both have droplets/clusters the spinning can't be sustained because, firstly, they will stick to each other and, secondly, because they will have been spinning in exactly the opposite directions, neutralizing each other's spin. 
there would have to be significant differences in humidity of the two bodies of air for the spinning to be sustained. 


It explains why tornadoes and thunderstorms are associated with (correlated with) atmospheric moist/dry differentness in wind shear and not just wind shear.
Answers to questions are on next page.


It is, in my opinion, very much not ironic that the following words were spoken by a person who I later confirmed to be a V-Phasian, "You can't dispute something you don't understand and you can't understand something you don't believe." It seemed to me that that one statement explained both their elusiveness and the peculiarity of their approach to science. The upshot being that in order to dispute their thinking, in their eyes, you first have to believe it and if you come up short then you must believe harder. Because until you believe you cannot understand. Ironically, at this time I was still debating with myself about the very existence of the V-Phasians. And then I did something that I would normally not recommend anybody do when confronting scientifically controversial issues. I endeavored to believe in the V-phasian model. It started with the spinning chains of H2O, as introduced in the previous chapter. In this chapter we will employ these spinning chains of H2O to develop a principle, application of which will lead to a solution to tornadoes.
As I stated, it began with the spinning chains of H2O molecules. I just decided to start seeing them: 10 to 60 molecules in length, billions per square foot of an inch thick sheet of vortex plasma, each spinning on their own central axis, constantly being bombarded by O2 and N2 molecules as a result of wind shear along a boundary, impacting at a side-glancing angle, imparting energy into these spinning chains of H2O molecules, resulting in surface tension on steroids—structure. Through this visualization I came to more fully appreciate the importance of kinetic energy and constancy thereof to the persistence of vortex plasma (structure), and vice versa. Specifically, just as one could see the existence or emergence of structure as the result of the energy of the molecular collisions along a dry/moist boundary one could also see said structure as facilitating the maintenance or conservation of said energy. We can think of a smooth surface, any kind of smooth surface, as having the property of reflecting energy back into the flow and, thereby, reducing the friction that would otherwise be the case, causing it to accelerate as its energy is conserved. With the increase in speed more energy is available to achieve growth (spread) of vortex plasma (structure), assuming there are resources (differentness) for it to grow (spread) into. We can think of it being like fire (another form of plasma), once a fire gets started it, thereby, has more energy (heat) for it to grow into its resources and it will only stop growing when it has run out of its resources. Likewise, as long as there is differentness that is accessible to the structure there is potential for a positive feedback effect: more structure results in more energy and more energy results in growth of more structure—again, assuming differentness is available (and accessible).
Just as one can roll a piece of paper into a tube, sheets of vortex plasma can/will roll around themselves into a tube or vortex. There are significant differences between the planar (sheet) form of vortex plasma and the tubular (vortex) form with respect to [a.] how they handle energy, [b.] how they grow into their resources, [c.] what kinds of differentness is or is not a resource to their growth, and in [d.] how they get access to more resources (more differentness). In the flat or planar form of vortex plasma (structure) the resulting relative speed of the collisions that take place at the dry/'moist boundary is limited to the relative speed of the two bodies of air themselves. In contrast, in the tubular form of vortex plasma [a.] the molecules
moving down the tube are isolated from the friction of the larger body of air and can, as a result, continue to accelerate down the length of the tube. Thus in the tubular form of vortex plasma the upper limit of the speed of the air moving through the tube is defined by the length of the tube and differences in air pressure from the entrance of the tube to the exit of the tube (note: with tube lengths hundreds of miles long the difference in air pressure can be significant). The most significant implication of this (especially with respect to tornadoes) is that [a.] the tubular form of vortex plasma has much greater capacity for energy conservation, which is manifested in greater potential for high wind speeds. Secondly, since it has so much more energy available to it, the tubular form of vortex plasma has more energy available to achieve growth. Consequently [b.] the growth of tubular vortex plasma can be very rapid, almost explosive in some instances. Thirdly, the directionality of growth of vortex plasma in the planar form can be upstream, down stream and even lateral (sideways) along the plane of the boundary layer. In contrast, the tubular form can only grow upstream and/or downstream. Additionally, the tubular form has a spin not unlike the spin put on a bullet by rifling of the gun barrel. Together these result in the tubular form of vortex plasma being limited to growth in a relatively straight manner. That means that [c.] the tubular form of vortex plasma is much more dependent on finding a pathway of differentness that is straight and long in order to achieve growth. (As you will see this has significant implications for tornado mitigation.) Additionally, due to its much greater potential for creating high wind speeds down its length, the tubular form of vortex plasma has, potentially, a much greater ability to pull resources towards it by way of its vacuum effect. And so, [d.] the tubular form vortex plasma is highly capable of finding its way to its resources, paths of straight-line differentness, by creating updrafts and lateral winds (high winds aloft).
The principle that emerges from all of this is that tubular vortex plasma aggressively seeks out and grows into the path of greatest straight-line differentness. Application of this principle is the key to understanding how weather is dictated by the jet stream. Itself a tubular form of vortex plasma (spanning hundreds of miles), the jet stream resides (persists, is most stable) where the path of straight-line differentness is usually greatest in our atmosphere: the top of the troposphere, at the boundary with the very dry stratosphere and the relatively moist troposphere below. (More specifically, this boundary exists where three atmospheric entities intersect: two Hadley cells of the troposphere adjacent to each other and the stratosphere above. Hereafter we will refer to this as the tropo-strato boundary.) Understanding atmospheric instability has to do with understanding the growth characteristics (as delineated above) of this tubular vortex plasma (the jet stream) and with understanding how and why the path of greatest straight-line differentness (it being the resource for vortex plasma growth) sometimes tracks down from the tropo-strato boundary to the lower parts of our troposphere, resulting in storms and tornadoes.
There are two reasons the path of greatest straight-line differentness sometimes tracks down in our atmosphere (downward from the tropo-strato boundary). Firstly, H2O is constantly falling out of our atmosphere due to the fact that it clumps into clusters/droplets (especially at the colder temperatures of higher altitudes) and is, therefore heavier per volume than air. As a result, the level of straight-line differentness begins to track down from the tropo-strato boundary into the lower (moister) parts of the troposphere. Secondly, the lower troposphere has its own source of paths of straight-line differentness: the smooth, long, and straight, boundary conditions that form along "inversion" layers. (Specifically, warm moist air pools up, forming a smooth, flat boundary between moist/dry air in an extensive area or region.) If and when the jet stream (tubular vortex plasma), following the path of greatest straight-line differentness down from a relatively desiccate tropo-strato boundary, does find its way to one of these sources of straight-line differentness in the lower troposphere the resulting swirling updrafts, low pressure, and precipitation is what we see as storms. One effect of these storms is to pull large amounts of moist air higher into the troposphere to, in effect, replace that that, as mentioned above, is constantly being pulled down by gravity.
Out of all of this we arrive at the ultimate irony of the weather system on our planet: calm weather conditions allow/enable the formation of inversion layers in the lower troposphere that, eventually, draw in storms; storms re-hydrate (moisturize) the upper troposphere, restoring the straight-line differentness to the tropo-strato boundary.  In compliance with the principle that tubular vortex plasma (the jet stream) aggressively seeks out and grows into the path of greatest straight-line differentness, as long as the upper troposphere is well hydrated, V-plasma growth does not veer from the tropo-strato boundary, resulting in calm weather conditions in the lower troposphere.  From all of this we also arrive at the following realization: the length of time associated with calm weather is one of the greatest risk factors for severe weather in that calm weather allows the formation of high quality (smooth) long, straight, lateral layers ("inversion" layers) in the lower troposphere that are, essentially, the accidents waiting to happen in tornado alley and other parts of the world that experience large, destructive tornadoes.
The most dangerous tornadoes are very large, very energetic, and appear on the scene very suddenly. They are almost always preceded by blustery wind conditions, or what has been referred to as high winds aloft. As explained above, these high winds aloft are actually the result of the tropo-strato boundary becoming desiccate (dry) resulting in the path of greatest straight-line differentness tracking down into the lower parts of the troposphere. As it does vortex plasma growth starts following this path down, creating low pressure and updrafts. (Note: updrafts, like those associated with thunderstorms, have nothing whatsoever to do with convection.) The jet stream is, in effect, trying to find its way to paths of straight-line differentness by pulling them up higher into the atmosphere, closer to the main flow of the jet stream. If and when it does find its way to a path of straight-line differentness the result is, usually, a benign and even beneficial rainstorm. Sometimes, however, these down tracking extensions of the jet stream find their way to very high quality (smooth), long, straight (uninterrupted) pathways of differentness (which, as explained above, originated as "inversion" layers but may have since been pulled closer by the vacuum effect of the down-tracking jet stream) resulting in rapid growth of vortex plasma and transfer of large amounts of energy from the jet stream to facilitate that growth. If this takes place anywhere near the ground the entrance of the tubular vortex plasma will suck itself to the ground (as a natural result of it vacuum effect) becoming a tornado. And so, the reason larger tornadoes are larger is because of any combination of its path of differentness (an "inversion" layer, created during calm conditions) being higher quality (distinct difference in humidity between boundaries), longer, straighter, and/or closer to the ground.
But there is reason for optimism with this new understanding of tornadogenesis. In addition to being relatively easy to locate and easy to get to, differentness is extremely fragile. The slightest perturbation destroys it. The downwash coming off the wings of an airplane, for example, is more than enough to destroy any differentness in its immediate vicinity. Moreover, the whole scale destruction of these boundary layers of differentness may not be necessary to mitigate tornadoes. As was mentioned above, the tubular form of vortex plasma is much more dependent on finding a pathway of differentness that is straight in order to achieve growth. And the magnitude of this growth is dependent on these pathways of differentness being long. By flying patterns with aircraft along these layers of differentness and allowing the downwash off the wings to divide these sleeping giants of differentness into segments, like cutting fabric, we may be able to interrupt the straight-line continuity of the differentness in these inversion layers. Theoretically, this will prevent the kind of runaway vortex plasma growth associated with large, high energy, storms and tornadoes.