When it comes to moist/dry wind shear boundaries McGinn is not saying warm moist air wants to rise.  The notion of warm/moist air rising is the traditional notion that McGinn points out is flawed. Nevertheless McGinn does say that warm/moist air is instrumental in the emergence of vortices in that extensive, flat boundaries between warm, moist air and cooler drier air do form naturally in the atmosphere during calm conditions. These boundaries provide a means for the cooler/drier air to flow across the more stable warm/moist layer below.  Along this extensive moist/dry wind shear boundary collisions occur on a microscopic level and these collisions cause the nanodroplets along the surface of the warm, moist air to begin to spin, eventually causing them to become highly polar polymers of water molecules.


Additionally, McGinn is opposed to the notion that the cooler drier air can act as a cap.  Specifically, warm moist air, being heavier, is not more buoyant that cooler drier air.  And cooler drier air does not have any structural properties that would allow it to cap or hold down any purported buoyant warm, moist air.  Instead it is the ability of cooler, drier air to flow across the surface of the more stable warm, moist air below that is most significant in regard to the emergence of the surface tension amplified, water based, plasma of atmospheric vortices.  And this is because of the (as previously mentioned) collisions of the molecules of the cooler, drier body of air that cause the spinning of the nanodroplets along the surface of the warmer, moister body of air upon which if flows.